The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Expression of Emotion in Man and Animals, by
Charles Darwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Expression of Emotion in Man and Animals

Author: Charles Darwin

Release Date: March, 1998 [EBook #1227]
Last Updated: August 2, 2012

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMOTION IN MAN AND ANIMALS ***




Produced by Charles Keller and David Widger






THE EXPRESSION OF THE EMOTIONS IN MAN AND ANIMALS

By Charles Darwin


_With Photographic And Other Illustrations_

New York

D. Appleton And Company

1899




DETAILED CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION......................................................Pages
1-26

CHAP. I--GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION.The three chief principles
stated--The first principle--Serviceable actions become habitual in
association with certain states of the mind, and are performed
whether or not of service in each particular case--The force of
habit--Inheritance--Associated habitual movements in man--Reflex
actions--Passage of habits into reflex actions--Associated habitual
movements in the lower animals--Concluding remarks............27-49

CHAP. II--GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION--_continued_. The
Principle of Antithesis--Instances in the dog and cat--Origin of the
principle--Conventional signs--The principle of antithesis has not
arisen from opposite actions being consciously performed under opposite
impulses..........50-65

CHAP. III--GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION--_concluded_.
The principle of the direct action of the excited nervous system on the
body, independently of the will and in part of habit--Change of
colour in the hair--Trembling of the muscles--Modified
secretions--Perspiration--Expression of extreme pain--Of rage, great
joy, and terror--Contrast between the emotions which cause and do
not cause expressive movements--Exciting and depressing states of the
mind--Summary............................................ 66-82

CHAP. IV--MEANS OF EXPRESSION. IN ANIMALS. The emission of sounds--Vocal
sounds--Sounds otherwise produced--Erection of the dermal appendages,
hairs, feathers, &c., under the emotions of anger and terror--The
drawing back of the ears as a preparation for fighting, and as an
expression of anger--Erection of the ears and raising the head, a sign
of attention 88-114

CHAP. V.--SPECIAL EXPRESSIONS OF ANIMALS. The Dog, various expressive
movements of--Cats--Horses--Ruminants--Monkeys, their expression of joy
and affection--Of pain--Anger Astonishment and Terror Pages 115-145

CHAP. VI.--SPECIAL EXPRESSIONS OF MAN: SUFFERING AND WEEPING. The
screaming and weeping of infants--Form of features--Age at which weeping
commences--The effects of habitual restraint on weeping--Sobbing--Cause
of the contraction of the muscles round the eyes during screaming--Cause
of the secretion of tears 146-175

CHAP. VII.--LOW SPIRITS, ANXIETY, GRIEF, DEJECTION, DESPAIR. General
effect of grief on the system--Obliquity of the eyebrows under
suffering--On the cause of the obliquity of the eyebrows--On the
depression of the corners of the mouth 176-195

CHAP. VIII.--JOY, HIGH SPIRITS, LOVE, TENDER FEELINGS, DEVOTION.
Laughter primarily the expression of joy--Ludicrous ideas--Movements
of the features during laughter--Nature of the sound produced--The
secretion of tears during loud laughter--Gradation from loud laughter
to gentle smiling--High spirits--The expression of love--Tender
feelings--Devotion 196-219

CHAP. IX.--REFLECTION--MEDITATION--ILL--TEMPER--SULKINESS DETERMINATION.
The act of frowning--Reflection with an effort or with the perception
of something difficult or disagreeable--Abstracted
meditation--Ill-temper--Moroseness--Obstinacy--Sulkiness and
pouting--Decision or determination--The firm closure of the mouth
220-236

CHAP. X.-HATRED AND ANGER. Hatred--Rage, effects of on the
system--Uncovering of the teeth--Rage in the insane--Anger and
indignation--As expressed by the various races of man--Sneering and
defiance--The uncovering of the canine teeth on one side of the face
237-252

CHAP. XI.--DISDAIN--CONTEMPT--DISGUST--GUILT--PRIDE,
ETC.--HELPLESSNESS--PATIENCE--AFFIRMATION AND NEGATION. Contempt, scorn
and disdain, variously expressed--Derisive Smile--Gestures expressive
of contempt--Disgust--Guilt, deceit, pride, etc.--Helplessness or
impotence--Patience--Obstinacy--Shrugging the shoulders common to most
of the races of man--Signs of affirmation and negation 253-277

CHAP. XII.--SURPRISE--ASTONISHMENT--FEAR--HORROR.
Surprise, astonishment--Elevation of the eyebrows--Opening
the mouth--Protrusion of the lips--Gestures accompanying
surprise--Admiration Fear--Terror--Erection of the hair--Contraction of
the platysma muscle--Dilatation of the pupils--horror--Conclusion. Pages
278-308

CHAP. XIII.--SELF-ATTENTION--SHAME--SHYNESS--MODESTY: BLUSHING.
Nature of a blush--Inheritance--The parts of the body most
affected--Blushing in the various races of man--Accompanying
gestures--Confusion of mind--Causes of blushing--Self-attention,
the fundamental element--Shyness--Shame, from broken moral laws and
conventional rules--Modesty--Theory of blushing--Recapitulation 309-346

CHAP. XIV.--CONCLUDING REMARKS AND SUMMARY.
The three leading principles which have determined the chief movements
of expression--Their inheritance--On the part which the will and
intention have played in the acquirement of various expressions--The
instinctive recognition of expression--The bearing of our subject on
the specific unity of the races of man--On the successive acquirement
of various expressions by the progenitors of man--The importance of
expression--Conclusion 347-366

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

    FIG.  PAGE
     1. Diagram of the muscles of the face, from Sir C. Bell     24
     2.   "   "   "   Henle................ 24
     3.   "   "   "   "................ 25
     4 Small dog watching a cat on a table   43
     5 Dog approaching another dog with hostile intentions  52
     6. Dog in a humble and affectionate frame of mind      53
     7. Half-bred Shepherd Dog     54
     8. Dog caressing his master   55
     9. Cat, savage, and prepared to fight   58
     10. Cat in an affectionate frame of mind     59
     11. Sound-producing quills from the tail of the Porcupine   93
     12. Hen driving away a dog from her chickens......98
     13. Swan driving away an intruder.................99
     14. Head of snarling dog.........................117
     15. Cat terrified at a dog.......................125
     16. Cynopithecus niger, in a placid condition....135
     17. The same, when pleased by being caressed.....135
     18. Chimpanzee disappointed and sulky............139
     19. Photograph of an insane woman................296
     20. Terror.......................................299
     21. Horror and Agony.............................306

  Plate I. to face page 147    Plate V. to face page 254.
  "  II.  "   178.      "   VI.  "   264.
  "  III. "   200.      "   VII. "   300.
  "  IV.  "   248.

_N. B_.--Several of the figures in these seven Heliotype Plates
have been reproduced from photographs, instead of from the original
negatives; and they are in consequence somewhat indistinct. Nevertheless
they are faithful copies, and are much superior for my purpose to any
drawing, however carefully executed.




ON THE EXPRESSION OF THE EMOTIONS IN MAN AND ANIMALS.




INTRODUCTION.

MANY works have been written on Expression, but a greater number on
Physiognomy,--that is, on the recognition of character through the study
of the permanent form of the features. With this latter subject I am
not here concerned. The older treatises,[1] which I have consulted, have
been of little or no service to me. The famous 'Conferences'[2] of the
painter Le Brun, published in 1667, is the best known ancient work,
and contains some good remarks. Another somewhat old essay, namely,
the 'Discours,' delivered 1774-1782, by the well-known Dutch anatomist
Camper,[3] can hardly be considered as having made any marked advance in
the subject. The following works, on the contrary, deserve the fullest
consideration.

Sir Charles Bell, so illustrious for his discoveries in physiology,
published in 1806 the first edition, and in the third edition of his
'Anatomy and Philosophy of Expression.'[4] He may with justice be said,
not only to have laid the foundations of the subject as a branch of
science, but to have built up a noble structure. His work is in every
way deeply interesting; it includes graphic descriptions of the various
emotions, and is admirably illustrated. It is generally admitted that
his service consists chiefly in having shown the intimate relation which
exists between the movements of expression and those of respiration. One
of the most important points, small as it may at first appear, is that
the muscles round the eyes are involuntarily contracted during violent
expiratory efforts, in order to protect these delicate organs from the
pressure of the blood. This fact, which has been fully investigated for
me with the greatest kindness by Professors Donders of Utrecht, throws,
as we shall hereafter see, a flood of light on several of the most
important expressions of the human countenance. The merits of Sir C.
Bell's work have been undervalued or quite ignored by several foreign
writers, but have been fully admitted by some, for instance by M.
Lemoine,[5] who with great justice says:--"Le livre de Ch. Bell devrait
etre medite par quiconque essaye de faire parler le visage de l'homme,
par les philosophes aussi bien que par les artistes, car, sous une
apparence plus legere et sous le pretexte de l'esthetique, c'est un
des plus beaux monuments de la science des rapports du physique et du
moral."

From reasons which will presently be assigned, Sir C. Bell did not
attempt to follow out his views as far as they might have been carried.
He does not try to explain why different muscles are brought into action
under different emotions; why, for instance, the inner ends of the
eyebrows are raised, and the corners of the mouth depressed, by a person
suffering from grief or anxiety.

In 1807 M. Moreau edited an edition of Lavater on Physiognomy,[6] in
which he incorporated several of his own essays, containing excellent
descriptions of the movements of the facial muscles, together with
many valuable remarks. He throws, however, very little light on the
philosophy of the subject. For instance, M. Moreau, in speaking of the
act of frowning, that is, of the contraction of the muscle called by
French writers the _soucilier_ (_corrigator supercilii_), remarks with
truth:--"Cette action des sourciliers est un des symptomes les plus
tranches de l'expression des affections penibles ou concentrees." He
then adds that these muscles, from their attachment and position, are
fitted "a resserrer, a concentrer les principaux traits de la _face_,
comme il convient dans toutes ces passions vraiment oppressives
ou profondes, dans ces affections dont le sentiment semble porter
l'organisation a revenir sur elle-meme, a se contracter et a
_s'amoindrir_, comme pour offrir moins de prise et de surface a des
impressions redoutables ou importunes." He who thinks that remarks of
this kind throw any light on the meaning or origin of the different
expressions, takes a very different view of the subject to what I do.

The earliest edition of this work, referred to in the preface to the
edition of 1820 in ten volumes, as containing the observations of M.
Moreau, is said to have been published in 1807; and I have no doubt that
this is correct, because the 'Notice sur Lavater' at the commencement
of volume i. is dated April 13, 1806. In some bibliographical works,
however, the date of 1805--1809 is given, but it seems impossible that
1805 can be correct. Dr. Duchenne remarks ('Mecanisme de la Physionomie
Humaine,'-8vo edit. 1862, p. 5, and 'Archives Generales de Medecine,'
Jan. et Fev. 1862) that M. Moreau "_a compose pour son ouvrage un
article important_," &c., in the year 1805; and I find in volume i. of
the edition of 1820 passages bearing the dates of December 12, 1805, and
another January 5, 1806, besides that of April 13, 1806, above referred
to. In consequence of some of these passages having thus been COMPOSED
in 1805, Dr. Duchenne assigns to M. Moreau the priority over Sir C.
Bell, whose work, as we have seen, was published in 1806. This is a very
unusual manner of determining the priority of scientific works; but such
questions are of extremely little importance in comparison with their
relative merits. The passages above quoted from M. Moreau and from Le
Brun are taken in this and all other cases from the edition of 1820 of
Lavater, tom. iv. p. 228, and tom. ix. p. 279. In the above passage
there is but a slight, if any, advance in the philosophy of the subject,
beyond that reached by the painter Le Brun, who, in 1667, in describing
the expression of fright, says:--"Le sourcil qui est abaisse d'un cote
et eleve de l'autre, fait voir que la partie elevee semble le vouloir
joindre au cerveau pour le garantir du mal que l'ame apercoit, et le
cote qui est abaisse et qui parait enfle,--nous fait trouver dans cet
etat par les esprits qui viennent du cerveau en abondance, comme polir
couvrir l'aine et la defendre du mal qu'elle craint; la bouche fort
ouverte fait voir le saisissement du coeur, par le sang qui se retire
vers lui, ce qui l'oblige, voulant respirer, a faire un effort qui est
cause que la bouche s'ouvre extremement, et qui, lorsqu'il passe par les
organes de la voix, forme un son qui n'est point articule; que si les
muscles et les veines paraissent enfles, ce n'est que par les esprits
que le cerveau envoie en ces parties-la." I have thought the foregoing
sentences worth quoting, as specimens of the surprising nonsense which
has been written on the subject.

'The Physiology or Mechanism of Blushing,' by Dr. Burgess, appeared
in 1839, and to this work I shall frequently refer in my thirteenth
Chapter.

In 1862 Dr. Duchenne published two editions, in folio and octavo, of his
'Mecanisme de la Physionomie Humaine,' in which he analyses by means of
electricity, and illustrates by magnificent photographs, the movements
of the facial muscles. He has generously permitted me to copy as many of
his photographs as I desired. His works have been spoken lightly of, or
quite passed over, by some of his countrymen. It is possible that Dr.
Duchenne may have exaggerated the importance of the contraction of
single muscles in giving expression; for, owing to the intimate manner
in which the muscles are connected, as may be seen in Henle's anatomical
drawings[7]--the best I believe ever published it is difficult to
believe in their separate action. Nevertheless, it is manifest that Dr.
Duchenne clearly apprehended this and other sources of error, and as it
is known that he was eminently successful in elucidating the physiology
of the muscles of the hand by the aid of electricity, it is probable
that he is generally in the right about the muscles of the face. In my
opinion, Dr. Duchenne has greatly advanced the subject by his treatment
of it. No one has more carefully studied the contraction of each
separate muscle, and the consequent furrows produced on the skin. He
has also, and this is a very important service, shown which muscles are
least under the separate control of the will. He enters very little into
theoretical considerations, and seldom attempts to explain why certain
muscles and not others contract under the influence of certain emotions.
A distinguished French anatomist, Pierre Gratiolet, gave a course of
lectures on Expression at the Sorbonne, and his notes were published
(1865) after his death, under the title of 'De la Physionomie et des
Mouvements d'Expression.' This is a very interesting work, full of
valuable observations. His theory is rather complex, and, as far as it
can be given in a single sentence (p. 65), is as follows:--"Il resulte,
de tous les faits que j'ai rappeles, que les sens, l'imagination et la
pensee ellememe, si elevee, si abstraite qu'on la suppose, ne peuvent
s'exercer sans eveiller un sentiment correlatif, et que ce sentiment
se traduit directement, sympathiquement, symboliquement ou
metaphoriquement, dans toutes les spheres des organs exterieurs, qui la
racontent tous, suivant leur mode d'action propre, comme si chacun d'eux
avait ete directement affecte."

Gratiolet appears to overlook inherited habit, and even to some extent
habit in the individual; and therefore he fails, as it seems to me, to
give the right explanation, or any explanation at all, of many gestures
and expressions. As an illustration of what he calls symbolic movements,
I will quote his remarks (p. 37), taken from M. Chevreul, on a man
playing at billiards. "Si une bille devie legerement de la direction
que le joueur pretend zlui imprimer, ne l'avez-vous pas vu cent fois
la pousser du regard, de la tete et meme des epaules, comme si ces
mouvements, purement symboliques, pouvaient rectifier son trajet? Des
mouvements non moins significatifs se produisent quand la bille manque
d'une impulsion suffisante. Et cliez les joueurs novices, ils sont
quelquefois accuses au point d'eveiller le sourire sur les levres des
spectateurs." Such movements, as it appeirs to me, may be attributed
simply to habit. As often as a man has wished to move an object to one
side, he has always pushed it to that side when forwards, he has pushed
it forwards; and if he has wished to arrest it, he has pulled backwards.
Therefore, when a man sees his ball travelling in a wrong direction, and
he intensely wishes it to go in another direction, he cannot avoid, from
long habit, unconsciously performing movements which in other cases he
has found effectual.

As an instance of sympathetic movements Gratiolet gives (p. 212) the
following case:--"un jeune chien A oreilles droites, auquel son maitre
presente de loin quelque viande appetissante, fixe avec ardeur ses yeux
sur cet objet dont il suit tous les mouvements, et pendant que les yeux
regardent, les deux oreilles se portent en avant comme si cet objet
pouvait etre entendu." Here, instead of speaking of sympathy between
the ears and eyes, it appears to me more simple to believe, that as dogs
during many generations have, whilst intently looking at any object,
pricked their ears in order to perceive any sound; and conversely have
looked intently in the direction of a sound to which they may have
listened, the movements of these organs have become firmly associated
together through long-continued habit.

Dr. Piderit published in 1859 an essay on Expression, which I have not
seen, but in which, as he states, he forestalled Gratiolet in many of
his views. In 1867 he published his 'Wissenschaftliches System der Mimik
und Physiognomik.' It is hardly possible to give in a few sentences a
fair notion of his views; perhaps the two following sentences will tell
as much as can be briefly told: "the muscular movements of expression
are in part related to imaginary objects, and in part to imaginary
sensorial impressions. In this proposition lies the key to the
comprehension of all expressive muscular movements." (s. 25) Again,
"Expressive movements manifest themselves chiefly in the numerous and
mobile muscles of the face, partly because the nerves by which they
are set into motion originate in the most immediate vicinity of the
mind-organ, but partly also because these muscles serve to support the
organs of sense." (s. 26.) If Dr. Piderit had studied Sir C. Bell's
work, he would probably not have said (s. 101) that violent laughter
causes a frown from partaking of the nature of pain; or that with
infants (s. 103) the tears irritate the eyes, and thus excite the
contraction of the surrounding in muscles. Many good remarks are
scattered throughout this volume, to which I shall hereafter refer.

Short discussions on Expression may be found in various works, which
need not here be particularised. Mr. Bain, however, in two of his works
has treated the subject at some length. He says,[8] "I look upon the
expression so-called as part and parcel of the feeling. I believe it to
be a general law of the mind that along with the fact of inward feeling
or consciousness, there is a diffusive action or excitement over the
bodily members." In another place he adds, "A very considerable number
of the facts may be brought under the following principle: namely, that
states of pleasure are connected with an increase, and states of pain
with an abatement, of some, or all, of the vital functions." But the
above law of the diffusive action of feelings seems too general to throw
much light on special expressions.

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in treating of the Feelings in his 'Principles of
Psychology' (1855), makes the following remarks:--"Fear, when strong,
expresses itself in cries, in efforts to hide or escape, in palpitations
and tremblings; and these are just the manifestations that would
accompany an actual experience of the evil feared. The destructive
passions are shown in a general tension of the muscular system, in
gnashing of the teeth and protrusion of the claws, in dilated eyes
and nostrils in growls; and these are weaker forms of the actions that
accompany the killing of prey." Here we have, as I believe, the true
theory of a large number of expressions; but the chief interest and
difficulty of the subject lies in following out the wonderfully complex
results. I infer that some one (but who he is I have not been able to
ascertain) formerly advanced a nearly similar view, for Sir C. Bell
says,[9] "It has been maintained that what are called the external signs
of passion, are only the concomitants of those voluntary movements which
the structure renders necessary." Mr. Spencer has also published[10]
a valuable essay on the physiology of Laughter, in which he insists on
"the general law that feeling passing a certain pitch, habitually
vents itself in bodily action," and that "an overflow of nerve-force
undirected by any motive, will manifestly take first the most habitual
routes; and if these do not suffice, will next overflow into the less
habitual ones." This law I believe to be of the highest importance in
throwing light on our subject.'

All the authors who have written on Expression, with the exception of
Mr. Spencer--the great expounder of the principle of Evolution--appear
to have been firmly convinced that species, man of course included,
came into existence in their present condition. Sir C. Bell, being
thus convinced, maintains that many of our facial muscles are "purely
instrumental in expression;" or are "a special provision" for this sole
object.[12] But the simple fact that the anthropoid apes possess the
same facial muscles as we do,[13] renders it very improbable that these
muscles in our case serve exclusively for expression; for no one, I
presume, would be inclined to admit that monkeys have been endowed with
special muscles solely for exhibiting their hideous grimaces. Distinct
uses, independently of expression, can indeed be assigned with much
probability for almost all the facial muscles.

Sir C. Bell evidently wished to draw as broad a distinction as possible
between man and the lower animals; and he consequently asserts that with
"the lower creatures there is no expression but what may be referred,
more or less plainly, to their acts of volition or necessary instincts."
He further maintains that their faces "seem chiefly capable of
expressing rage and fear."[14] But man himself cannot express love and
humility by external signs, so plainly as does a dog, when with drooping
ears, hanging lips, flexuous body, and wagging tail, he meets his
beloved master. Nor can these movements in the dog be explained by acts
of volition or necessary instincts, any more than the beaming eyes and
smiling cheeks of a man when he meets an old friend. If Sir C. Bell had
been questioned about the expression of affection in the dog, he would
no doubt have answered that this animal had been created with special
instincts, adapting him for association with man, and that all further
enquiry on the subject was superfluous.

Although Gratiolet emphatically denies[15] that any muscle has been
developed solely for the sake of expression, he seems never to have
reflected on the principle of evolution. He apparently looks at each
species as a separate creation. So it is with the other writers on
Expression. For instance, Dr. Duchenne, after speaking of the movements
of the limbs, refers to those which give expression to the face, and
remarks:[16] "Le createur n'a donc pas eu a se preoccuper ici des
besoins de la mecanique; il a pu, selon sa sagesse, ou--que l'on me
pardonne cette maniere de parler--par une divine fantaisie, mettre
en action tel ou tel muscle, un seul ou plusieurs muscles a la fois,
lorsqu'il a voulu que les signes caracteristiques des passions, meme les
plus fugaces, lussent ecrits passagerement sur la face de l'homme. Ce
langage de la physionomie une fois cree, il lui a suffi, pour le
rendre universel et immuable, de donner a tout etre humain la faculte
instinctive d'exprimer toujours ses sendments par la contraction des
memes muscles."

Many writers consider the whole subject of Expression as inexplicable.
Thus the illustrious physiologist Muller, says,[17] "The completely
different expression of the features in different passions shows that,
according to the kind of feeling excited, entirely different groups of
the fibres of the facial nerve are acted on. Of the cause of this we are
quite ignorant."

No doubt as long as man and all other animals are viewed as independent
creations, an effectual stop is put to our natural desire to investigate
as far as possible the causes of Expression. By this doctrine, anything
and everything can be equally well explained; and it has proved as
pernicious with respect to Expression as to every other branch of
natural history. With mankind some expressions, such as the bristling of
the hair under the influence of extreme terror, or the uncovering of the
teeth under that of furious rage, can hardly be understood, except
on the belief that man once existed in a much lower and animal-like
condition. The community of certain expressions in distinct though
allied species, as in the movements of the same facial muscles during
laughter by man and by various monkeys, is rendered somewhat more
intelligible, if we believe in their descent from a common progenitor.
He who admits on general grounds that the structure and habits of all
animals have been gradually evolved, will look at the whole subject of
Expression in a new and interesting light.

The study of Expression is difficult, owing to the movements being often
extremely slight, and of a fleeting nature. A difference may be clearly
perceived, and yet it may be impossible, at least I have found it so, to
state in what the difference consists. When we witness any deep emotion,
our sympathy is so strongly excited, that close observation is forgotten
or rendered almost impossible; of which fact I have had many curious
proofs. Our imagination is another and still more serious source of
error; for if from the nature of the circumstances we expect to see
any expression, we readily imagine its presence. Notwithstanding Dr.
Duchenne's great experience, he for a long time fancied, as he states,
that several muscles contracted under certain emotions, whereas he
ultimately convinced himself that the movement was confined to a single
muscle.

In order to acquire as good a foundation as possible, and to ascertain,
independently of common opinion, how far particular movements of the
features and gestures are really expressive of certain states of the
mind, I have found the following means the most serviceable. In the
first place, to observe infants; for they exhibit many emotions, as Sir
C. Bell remarks, "with extraordinary force;" whereas, in after life,
some of our expressions "cease to have the pure and simple source from
which they spring in infancy."[18]

In the second place, it occurred to me that the insane ought to
be studied, as they are liable to the strongest passions, and give
uncontrolled vent to them. I had, myself, no opportunity of doing this,
so I applied to Dr. Maudsley and received from him an introduction
to Dr. J. Crichton Browne, who has charge of an immense asylum near
Wakefield, and who, as I found, had already attended to the subject.
This excellent observer has with unwearied kindness sent me copious
notes and descriptions, with valuable suggestions on many points; and I
can hardly over-estimate the value of his assistance. I owe also, to the
kindness of Mr. Patrick Nicol, of the Sussex Lunatic Asylum, interesting
statements on two or three points.

Thirdly Dr. Duchenne galvanized, as we have already seen, certain
muscles in the face of an old man, whose skin was little sensitive, and
thus produced various expressions which were photographed on a large
scale. It fortunately occurred to me to show several of the best plates,
without a word of explanation, to above twenty educated persons of
various ages and both sexes, asking them, in each case, by what emotion
or feeling the old man was supposed to be agitated; and I recorded their
answers in the words which they used. Several of the expressions were
instantly recognised by almost everyone, though described in not exactly
the same terms; and these may, I think, be relied on as truthful,
and will hereafter be specified. On the other hand, the most widely
different judgments were pronounced in regard to some of them. This
exhibition was of use in another way, by convincing me how easily we
may be misguided by our imagination; for when I first looked through
Dr. Duchenne's photographs, reading at the same time the text, and
thus learning what was intended, I was struck with admiration at the
truthfulness of all, with only a few exceptions. Nevertheless, if I had
examined them without any explanation, no doubt I should have been as
much perplexed, in some cases, as other persons have been.

Fourthly, I had hoped to derive much aid from the great masters in
painting and sculpture, who are such close observers. Accordingly, I
have looked at photographs and engravings of many well-known works; but,
with a few exceptions, have not thus profited. The reason no doubt
is, that in works of art, beauty is the chief object; and strongly
contracted facial muscles destroy beauty.[19] The story of the
composition is generally told with wonderful force and truth by
skilfully given accessories.

Fifthly, it seemed to me highly important to ascertain whether the same
expressions and gestures prevail, as has often been asserted without
much evidence, with all the races of mankind, especially with those who
have associated but little with Europeans. Whenever the same movements
of the features or body express the same emotions in several distinct
races of man, we may infer with much probability, that such expressions
are true ones,--that is, are innate or instinctive. Conventional
expressions or gestures, acquired by the individual during early life,
would probably have differed in the different races, in the same manner
as do their languages. Accordingly I circulated, early in the year
1867, the following printed queries with a request, which has been
fully responded to, that actual observations, and not memory, might be
trusted. These queries were written after a considerable interval of
time, during which my attention had been otherwise directed, and I can
now see that they might have been greatly improved. To some of the later
copies, I appended, in manuscript, a few additional remarks:--

(1.) Is astonishment expressed by the eyes and mouth being opened wide,
and by the eyebrows being raised?

(2.) Does shame exci